---
title: "Demystifying machine learning for population researchers"
editor: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

Advances in computational power and statistical algorithms, in
conjunction with the increasing availability of large datasets, have led
to a Cambrian explosion of machine learning (ML) methods. For population
researchers, these methods are useful not only for predicting population
dynamics but also as tools to improve causal inference tasks. However,
the rapid evolution of this literature, coupled with terminological
disparities from conventional approaches, renders these methods
enigmatic and arduous for many population researchers to grasp.

This workshop clarifies the goals, techniques, and applications of
machine learning methods for population research. The workshop covers

-   an introduction to ML methods for population researchers,

-   showcases of ML applications to answer causal questions,

-   discussions of the current developments of ML for population health,
    fertility and family dynamics, and

-   fosters critical discussions about the shortfalls of these
    techniques.

The main focus of this workshop is on ML techniques using quantitative
population data and research questions, not on ML language models. The
workshop consists of keynotes, contributed sessions, and a tutorial.

One keynote lecture will be delivered by Prof. Ian Lundberg (Cornell
University, <https://www.ianlundberg.org/>). Prof. Jennie E. Brand
(UCLA, <https://www.profjenniebrand.com/>) will deliver an online talk.

This in-person workshop will take place in November 5-6 at the Max
Planck Institute for Demographic Research in Rostock. We invite
population researchers with interest in ML applications. We aim to
receive contributions from different fields of population sciences, such
as population health, formal and social demography, public health and
economics, among others.

We invite submission of original research abstract with relevance to ML
and population sciences (max 500 words) and a CV (max. one page) to
MLworkshop\@demogr.mpg.de.

Submission Deadline: **30. April 2024**

Decisions on the selection will be communicated before May 15th. Please
direct any questions to this email address.

Organization committee: Angela Carollo, Aapo Hiilamo, Mikko Myrskyla.

*The workshop has no fees. Participants are expected to cover their
travel and accommodation but limited financial support, offered on a
competitive basis, is available for junior scientists or scientists from
low-middle income countries. Please indicate the request for such
funding at the time of abstract submission.*

*The workshop is organized by the Max Planck Institute for Demographic
Research and The Max Planck -- University of Helsinki Center for Social
Inequalities in Population Health.*

![](logos/maxhel.png){width="300"}

![](logos/MPIDR-EN@4x.png){width="300"}
